---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/linear-algebra/10-matrix-vector-multiplication/10-1-matrix-column-vector-multiplication-via-linear-combinations/","tags":["Type/Definition","Topic/Linear_Algebra"]}
---

Types: *N/A*
Examples: [[Linear Algebra/10 Matrix-Vector Multiplication/10.1.1 Example of Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication via Linear Combinations\|10.1.1 Example of Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication via Linear Combinations]]
Constructions: *N/A*
Generalizations: *N/A*

Properties: [[Linear Algebra/10 Matrix-Vector Multiplication/10.3 Properties of Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication\|10.3 Properties of Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication]]
Sufficiencies: *N/A*
Questions: *N/A*

> [!definition|*] Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication via Linear Combinations
> 
> Let matrix $A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ and [[Linear Algebra/03 Vector Modeling/3.1 Column Vector\|3.1 Column Vector]] $\vec{x} \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times 1}$. 
> - Note that the number of rows of $\vec{x}$ matches the number of columns of $A$.
> - ! The inner dimensions must agree!
> 
> Then, the [[Linear Algebra/06 Span and Linear Independence/6.1 Linear Combination of Vectors#^f28bb0\|linear combination]] version of the matrix-column-vector product $A\vec{x} = \vec{b} \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times 1}$ is given by
> $$
> A \vec{x} = x_{1} \begin{bmatrix}
> a_{11} \\
> a_{21} \\
> \vdots \\
> a_{m1}
> \end{bmatrix} + x_{2}\begin{bmatrix}
> a_{12} \\
> a_{22} \\
> \vdots \\
> a_{m2}
> \end{bmatrix}+\dots+x_{n} \begin{bmatrix}
> a_{1n} \\
> a_{2n} \\
> \vdots \\
> a_{mn} 
> \end{bmatrix} = \vec{b}
> $$
> The matrix vector product can also be written using [[Linear Algebra/08 Anatomy of Matrices/8.11 Colon Notation\|8.11 Colon Notation]] and summation notation.
> $$
> A \vec{x} = x_{1} A(:,1) + x_{2}A(:,2) + \dots + x_{n} A(:,n) = \sum_{k=1}^{n} x_{k} A(:,k) = \vec{b}
> $$

**Remark.** In the real world when the matrix is on the left, it usually represents some real world data that we have collected. The right vector $\vec{x}$ is the algebraic work we are trying to do on this data.
$$
\underbrace{ \begin{bmatrix}
A 
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times n} }_{ \text{modeling matrix} } \cdot \underbrace{ \begin{bmatrix}
\vec{x}
\end{bmatrix}_{n \times 1} }_{ \text{algebraic work} }
$$
 Let's cut up our modeling matrix into columns and vector into individual scalars.
$$
[A]_{m \times n} = \begin{bmatrix}
A(:,1)  & A(:,2) & \dots & A(:,n)
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times n} \cdot \begin{bmatrix}
x_{1}  \\
\hline x_{2} \\
\hline \vdots \\
\hline x_{n}
\end{bmatrix}_{n \times 1}
$$
We multiply by "pairing" each column of $A$ with a corresponding scalar of $\vec{x}$.
$$
\begin{align*}
&= x_{1} A(:,1) + x_{2} A(:,2) + \dots + x_{n}A(:,n)\\
&= x_{1}\begin{bmatrix}
a_{11} \\
a_{21} \\
\vdots \\
a_{m1}
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times 1} + x_{2} \begin{bmatrix}
a_{12} \\
a_{22} \\
\vdots \\
a_{m2}
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times 1}+\dots+x_{n} \begin{bmatrix}
a_{1n} \\
a_{2n} \\
\vdots \\
a_{mn}
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times 1}
\end{align*}
$$

> [!question] Why must the inner dimensions agree?
> Because the product of matrix-column-vector multiplication is a linear combination, there has to be a matching scalar for each column of $A$ (no column left behind!). In other words, every column must have a scalar value to be matched with.

<span style='float:right;'>$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

**Remark.** We know what the input will look like, but what about the output? The size of the output will be the size of the sum of adding $m \times 1$ vectors. 
$$
\implies [A]_{m \times \cancel{ n }} \cdot [\vec{x}]_{\cancel{ n } \times 1} = \vec{b}_{m \times 1}
$$
A nice way to think of this would be the $n$ dimensions "cancelling" each other out. 
 <span style='float:right;'>$\blacklozenge$</span>
---
**Remark.** Instead of a linear combination, we can also see the product as entry-by-entry values. Recall that in [[Linear Algebra/04 Vector Arithmetic/4.1 Scalar-Vector Multiplication\|4.1 Scalar-Vector Multiplication]], we can bring the scalar inside the vector.
$$
A_{m \times n} \cdot \vec{x}_{n \times 1} = \begin{bmatrix}
x_{1} a_{11} \\
x_{1} a_{21} \\
\vdots \\
x_{1} a_{m1}
\end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix}
x_{2} a_{12} \\
x_{2} a_{22} \\
\vdots \\
x_{2} a_{m2}
\end{bmatrix} + \dots + \begin{bmatrix}
x_{n}a_{1n} \\
x_{n}a_{2n} \\
\vdots \\
x_{n}a_{mn}
\end{bmatrix}
$$
 We can go even further by looking at the sums using [[Linear Algebra/04 Vector Arithmetic/4.2 Column Vector Addition\|4.2 Column Vector Addition]].
 $$
\begin{bmatrix}
b_{1} \\
b_{2} \\
\vdots \\
b_{m}
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times 1}= \begin{bmatrix}
x_{1}a_{11}+x_{2}a_{12}+\dots+x_{n}a_{1n} \\
x_{2}a_{12}+x_{2}a_{22}+\dots+x_{n}a_{2n} \\
\vdots \\
x_{1}a_{m1 } + x_{2}a_{m 2} + \dots + x_{n} a_{m n}
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times 1}
$$
> [!claim|*] 
> Every individual entry of $\vec{b}$ can be calculated as an [[Linear Algebra/05 Inner Products and Vector Norms/5.1 Inner Product Between Vectors\|5.1 Inner Product Between Vectors]].
 
 <span style='float:right;'>$\blacklozenge$</span>