---
{"date created":"Thursday, May 9th 2024, 11:55:34 am","date modified":"Wednesday, May 15th 2024, 5:07:01 pm","time spent":"48 min","tags":["Type/Definition","Topic/Linear_Algebra"],"links":"[[10 Matrix-Vector Multiplication]]","dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/linear-algebra/10-matrix-vector-multiplication/10-2-matrix-column-vector-multiplication-via-dot-products/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---

Types: *N/A*
Examples: [[Linear Algebra/10 Matrix-Vector Multiplication/10.2.1 Example of Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication Using Dot Products\|10.2.1 Example of Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication Using Dot Products]]
Constructions: *N/A*
Generalizations: *N/A*

Properties: *N/A*
Sufficiencies: *N/A*
Questions: *N/A*

> [!definition|*] Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication via Dot Products
> 
> Let matrix $A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ and [[Linear Algebra/03 Vector Modeling/3.1 Column Vector\|3.1 Column Vector]] $\vec{x} \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times 1}$. We define matrix-column-vector product $A \cdot \vec{x} = \vec{b} \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times 1}$ with [[Linear Algebra/05 Inner Products and Vector Norms/5.1 Inner Product Between Vectors\|5.1 Inner Product Between Vectors]] using an entry-by-entry approach. The $i$th entry of the product $\vec{b} = A\cdot \vec{x}$ can be calculated via dot product between the $i$th row of $A$ and the vector $\vec{x}$.
> $$
> b_{i} = \text{entry}_{(i, 1)} (A\cdot \vec{x}) = (A(i,:))^{T} \cdot \vec{x} = \sum_{k=1}^{n} a_{ik} x_{k}
> $$
> for row index $i \in \{ 1,2, \dots, m \}$. When we calculate each entry of the output vector, we produce:
> $$
> A\vec{x} = \begin{bmatrix}
> a_{11}x_{1} + a_{12}x_{2} + \dots + a_{1n}x_{n} \\
> a_{21}x_{1} + a_{22}x_{2} + \dots + a_{2n}x_{n} \\
> \vdots \\
> a_{m1} x_{1} + a_{m 2 }x_{2} + \dots + a_{mn}x_{n}
> \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}
> b_{1} \\
> b_{2} \\
> \vdots \\
> b_{m}
> \end{bmatrix}
> $$
> - ! The inner dimensions must agree!
{ #fed7d7}


**Remark.** To analyze the dot product definition of matrix-column-vector multiplication, let's cut up our matrix $A$ into [[Linear Algebra/08 Anatomy of Matrices/8.14 Row Partition of a Matrix\|row partitions]] and output vector $\vec{b}$ into individual scalars.
$$
[A]_{m \times n} \cdot [\vec{n}]_{n \times 1} = \begin{bmatrix}
A(1,:)_{1 \times n} \\
\hline A(2,:)_{1 \times n} \\
\hline \vdots \\
\hline A(m,:)_{1 \times n}
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times n} \cdot [\vec{x}]_{n \times 1} = \begin{bmatrix}
b_{1} \\
\hline b_{2} \\
\hline \vdots \\
\hline b_{m}
\end{bmatrix}_{m \times 1} = [\vec{b}]_{m \times 1}
$$
Let's take a look at how the individual entries are computed. 
- & Recall that the inner product requires the dimensions of the operands to be the same. This is why we have to [[Linear Algebra/04 Vector Arithmetic/4.4 Transpose of a Vector\|transpose]] the row partitions of $A$.

$$
\begin{align*}
\implies b_{1} &= \text{Entry}_{(1, 1)} (\vec{b})\\
&= \underbrace{ [A(1,:)]_{n \times 1}^{\overbrace{ T }^{ \text{convert row to column} }} }_{ \text{first row of A} } \cdot \underbrace{ \vec{x}_{n \times 1} }_{ \text{column vector} }\\
&= \begin{bmatrix}
a_{11} \\
a_{12} \\
\vdots \\
a_{1n}
\end{bmatrix} \cdot \begin{bmatrix}
x_{1} \\
x_{2} \\
\vdots \\
x_{n}
\end{bmatrix}\\
&= a_{11}x_{1} + a_{12}x_{2} + \dots + a_{1n}x_{n}\\
&= \sum_{k=1}^{n}a_{ik} x_{k}
\end{align*}
$$
We use $k$ for the sum because when working with row partitions, we are iterating across the columns. This process would continue for the rest of the entries $b_{2}, b_{3}, \dots, b_{m}$.
 <span style='float:right;'>$\blacklozenge$</span>
 
---

**Remark.** Let's connect our dot product definition with our [[Linear Algebra/10 Matrix-Vector Multiplication/10.1 Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication via Linear Combinations\|10.1 Matrix-Column-Vector Multiplication via Linear Combinations]] definition. Using commutativity, we can rearrange our variables to shift our perspective. 
$$
\begin{align*}
\begin{bmatrix}
b_{1} \\
b_{2} \\
\vdots \\
b_{m}
\end{bmatrix} &= \begin{bmatrix}
a_{11}x_{1} + a_{12}x_{2} + \dots +a_{1n}x_{n} \\
a_{21}x_{1} + a_{22}x_{2} + \dots + a_{2n}x_{n} \\
\vdots \\
a_{m1}x_{1} + a_{m 2}x_{2} + \dots + a_{mn}x_{n}
\end{bmatrix}\\
&= \begin{bmatrix}
x_{1}a_{11} + x_{2}a_{12} + \dots + x_{n}a_{1n} \\
x_{1} a_{21} + x_{2}a_{22}+\dots+x_{n}a_{2n} \\
\vdots \\
x_{1} a_{m 1} + x_{2} a_{m 2} + \dots + x_{n} a _{mn}
\end{bmatrix}\\
&= \begin{bmatrix}
x_{1} a_{11} \\
x_{1} a_{21} \\
\vdots \\
x_{1} a_{m 1}
\end{bmatrix}+\begin{bmatrix}
x_{2} a_{12} \\
x_{2} a_{22} \\
\vdots \\
x_{2} a_{m 2}
\end{bmatrix} + \dots + \begin{bmatrix}
x_{n} a_{1n}  \\
x_{n} a_{2n} \\
\vdots \\
x_{n} a_{mn}
\end{bmatrix}\\
&= x_{1} \begin{bmatrix}
a_{11} \\
a_{21} \\
\vdots \\
a_{m 1}
\end{bmatrix} + x_{2} \begin{bmatrix}
a_{12} \\
a_{22} \\
\vdots \\
a_{m 2}
\end{bmatrix} + \dots + x_{n} \begin{bmatrix}
a_{1n} \\
a_{2n} \\
\vdots \\
a_{mn}
\end{bmatrix} && \text{Linear combination}
\end{align*}
$$
 The outputs are identical, but the operational units of each version are different. 
 - Operational unit of dot product version is a scalar.
 - Operational unit of linear combination version is a column partition.

 <span style='float:right;'>$\blacklozenge$</span>