---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/linear-algebra/14-invertible-matrix-theorem/14-1-the-invertible-matrix-theorem-part-1/","tags":["Type/Theorem","Topic/Linear_Algebra"]}
---

Types: [[Linear Algebra/14 Invertible Matrix Theorem/14.2 The Invertible Matrix Theorem Part 2\|14.2 The Invertible Matrix Theorem Part 2]], [[Linear Algebra/14 Invertible Matrix Theorem/14.3 The Invertible Matrix Theorem Part 3\|14.3 The Invertible Matrix Theorem Part 3]]
Examples: *N/A*
Constructions: *N/A*
Generalizations: *N/A*

Properties: *N/A*
Sufficiencies: *N/A*
Questions: *N/A*

> [!theorem|*] The Invertible Matrix Theorem: Part 1
> 
> Let $A \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$ be a square matrix with real entries. Then, the following statements are equivalent $\iff$. In other words, for a given matrix $A$, the statements are either all true or all false.
> 1. There is a matrix $C \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$ such that $CA = I_{n}$.
> 2. There is a matrix $D \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$ such that $AD = I_{n}$.
> 3. $A$ is an invertible matrix ($A$ is nonsingular).
> 4. $A$ is a row equivalent to an [[Linear Algebra/08 Anatomy of Matrices/8.9 Upper-Triangular Matrix\|8.9 Upper-Triangular Matrix]] with nonzero entries on the main diagonal.
> 5. $A$ has $n$ pivot positions.
> 6. The matrix equation $A\vec{x}=\vec{0}$ has only the trivial solution $\vec{x}=0$.
> 7. The columns of $A$ are [[Linear Algebra/06 Span and Linear Independence/6.7 Linearly Independent Vectors\|linearly independent]]. In other words,
>    $$
> \{ A(:,1),A(:,2), \dots, A(:,n) \}
> $$
> is a linearly independent set of vectors.
> 8. The linear transformation $f(\vec{x})=A\vec{x}$ is one-to-one.
> 9. The equation $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ has a unique solutions for all $\vec{b} \in \mathbb{R}^{n}$.
> 10. The columns of $A$ [[Linear Algebra/06 Span and Linear Independence/6.3 Span of a set of vectors\|span]] $\mathbb{R}^{n}$.
> 11. The linear transformation $f(\vec{x})=A\vec{x}$ maps $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ onto[^1] $\mathbb{R}^{n}$.
> 12. The matrix $A^{T}$ is invertible.

`\begin{proof}`
to be added :(
`\end{proof}`

[^1]: onto: for every element $y$ of the function's codomain, there exists at least one element $x$ in the function's domain such that $f(x)=y$