---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/linear-algebra/14-invertible-matrix-theorem/14-2-the-invertible-matrix-theorem-part-2/","tags":["Type/Theorem","Topic/Linear_Algebra"]}
---

Types: [[Linear Algebra/14 Invertible Matrix Theorem/14.1 The Invertible Matrix Theorem Part 1\|14.1 The Invertible Matrix Theorem Part 1]], [[Linear Algebra/14 Invertible Matrix Theorem/14.3 The Invertible Matrix Theorem Part 3\|14.3 The Invertible Matrix Theorem Part 3]]
Examples: *N/A*
Constructions: *N/A*
Generalizations: *N/A*

Properties: *N/A*
Sufficiencies: *N/A*
Questions: *N/A*

> [!theorem|*] The Invertible Matrix Theorem: Part 2
> 
> Let $A \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$ be a square matrix with real entries. Then, the following statements are equivalent $\iff$. In other words, for a given matrix $A$, the statements are either all true or all false.
> 13. The [[Linear Algebra/16 Determinants/16 Determinants\|determinant]] of $A$ is not zero: set $(A) \neq 0$.
> 14. The [[Linear Algebra/08 Anatomy of Matrices/8.13 Column Partition of a Matrix\|columns]] of $A$ form a basis for $\mathbb{R}^{n}$.
> 15. The column space of $A$ is $\mathbb{R}^{n}: \text{Col}(A)=\mathbb{R}^{n}$.
> 16. The dimension of the column space of $A$ is $n: \text{dim}(\text{Col}(A))=n$
> 17. The rank of $A$ is $n:\text{rank}(A)=n$.
> 18. The dull space of $A$ is $\{ \vec{0} \}:\text{Null}(A)=\{ \vec{0} \}$
> 19. The dimension of the null space of $A$ is $0:\text{dim}(\text{Null}(A))=0$.
> 20. The orthogonal complement of the column space of $A$ is $\{ \vec{0} \}$. We can write this as
> $$
> (\text{Col}(A))^{\mid}  = \{ \vec{0} \}.
> $$
> 21. The orthogonal complement of the null space of $A$ is $\mathbb{R}^{n}$: We write this
> $$
> (\text{Null}(A))^{\perp} = \mathbb{R}^{n}.
> $$
> 22. The row space of $A$ is $\mathbb{R}^{n}: \text{Row}(A)=\mathbb{R}^{n}$.

- [ ] What is column space and null space? #question