---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/linear-algebra/09-matrix-arithmetic/9-13-transpose-of-a-matrix/","tags":["Type/Definition","Topic/Linear_Algebra"]}
---

Types: *N/A*
Examples: *N/A*
Constructions: *N/A*
Generalizations: *N/A*

Properties: [[Linear Algebra/09 Matrix Arithmetic/9.14 Algebraic Properties of Matrix Transposes\|9.14 Algebraic Properties of Matrix Transposes]]
Sufficiencies: *N/A*
Questions: *N/A*

> [!definition|*] Transpose of a Matrix
> 
> Let matrix $A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$. The **transpose** of $A$, denoted by $A^{T} \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times m}$, is formed by turning all columns of $A$ into rows of $A^{T}$ and vice versa.
> 
> $$
> \begin{align}
>  & A = \begin{bmatrix}
> a & b & c \\
> d & e & f
> \end{bmatrix}_{2 \times 3} & A^{T} = \begin{bmatrix}
> a & d \\
> b & e \\
> c & f
> \end{bmatrix}_{3 \times 2}
> \end{align}
> $$

**Remark.** A nice way to visualize this is to imagine the matrix being "reflected" over a diagonal.
 <span style='float:right;'>$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

> [!example] Transpose of a Matrix by Columns
> Form $A^{T}\in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ by columns. Let $k \in [m]$.

Using [[Linear Algebra/08 Anatomy of Matrices/8.11 Colon Notation\|8.11 Colon Notation]], we can write our columns of matrix $A^{T}$.
$$
[A^{T}(:,k)]_{n \times 1} = \text{Column}_{k} (A^{T}) = [\text{Row}_{k}(A)]^{T} = [A(k,:)]^{T}
$$
$k$ is the identifier we are using for columns. To form the transpose of $A$ by columns, we simply rewrite each column as a row.

> [!example] Transpose of a Matrix by Rows
> Form $A^{T} \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ by rows. Let $i \in [n]$.

 Again, we can use colon notation.
 $$
A^{T}(i,:) = \text{Row}_{i }(A^{T}) = [\text{Column}_{i}(A)]^{T} = [A(:, i)]^{T}
$$

> [!example] Transpose of a Matrix Entry-by-Entry
> Form $A^{T}\in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ entry-by-entry. Let $k \in [m], i \in [n]$.

$$
A^{T}(i,k) = \text{Entry}_{ik} (A^{T}) = \text{Entry}_{ki} (A)
$$