---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/linear-algebra/18-solution-sets-for-general-linear-systems/18-10-rank-of-a-matrix/","tags":["Type/Definition","Topic/Linear_Algebra"]}
---

Types: *N/A*
Examples: *N/A*
Constructions: *N/A*
Generalizations: [[Linear Algebra/07 Matrix Modeling/7.1 Entry-by-Entry Definition of Matrix\|7.1 Entry-by-Entry Definition of Matrix]]

Properties: *N/A*
Sufficiencies: *N/A*
Questions: *N/A*

> [!definition|*] Rank of a Matrix
> 
> Let $A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ be a "given" matrix. The rank of our matrix $A$ is the number of pivots. To refer to this number, we define the nonnegative integer
> $$
> r = \text{rank}(A)
> $$
> which counts:
> - the number of pivots in $A$.
> - the number of pivot columns in $A$.
> - the number of linearly independent columns in $A$.
> - the number of pivot rows in $A$.
> - the number of linearly independent rows in $A$.
> 
> The number of pivot columns equals the number of pivot rows.

**Remark.** The pivot columns of $A$ are identical to the pivot columns of $U$, but the pivot rows of $A$ are NOT identical to the pivot rows of $U$ because when we matrix multiply on the left, we manipulate the row space of matrix $A$. However, the count is the same.
 <span style='float:right;'>$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

> [!definition|*] Bounds for the Rank of a Matrix
> Let $A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$ be a "given matrix."
> - There can be no more than one pivot per row.
> - There can be no more than one pivot per column.
> 
> Thus, the rank of the $m \times n$ matrix $A$ is bounded above:
> $$0 \leq r = \text{rank}(A)\leq \text{min}(m,n)$$
> In other words, if we have a short wide matrix, the rank is bounded by the row dimension. If we have a tall thin matrix, the rank is bounded by the column dimension.
> 

**Remark.** The only matrix with a zero rank is the zero matrix.
 <span style='float:right;'>$\blacklozenge$</span>